---
layout: post
title: Xylitol Sweetner 
categories: dentistry
img: /downloads/2014-02-20-xylitol/xylitol.JPG
thumb: /downloads/2014-02-20-xylitol/xylitol-thumb.gif
author: Susan Kimmel
authorImg: /img/susan.jpg
authorUrl: /users/user-susan.html
---
Yes! Xylitol, a natural sugar made from tree bark, plants, fruits, veggies. It tastes and looks like regular table sugar. How wonderful is that; but it gets even better! When the normal bacterial in our mouths metabolize Xylitol sugar they are not able to produce the acids that etch the enamel. By increasing the PH of our mouths it helps use the naturally occurring calcium in our saliva to remineralize our teeth, making them stronger. 

Studies show that food and beverages containing Xylitol reduce plaque by 50%. That is a greater plaque reduction than many tooth brush studies show. Besides reducing decay and plaque and remineralizing the enamel, Xylitol also has anti-inflammatory properties. Research shows it helps prevent infection and " is associated with enhanced healing of open wounds, ear and sinus infections and aspiration pneumonia" 

Because Xylitol does not use insulin for metabolism it is an ideal sweetener for diabetics or anyone who wants to reduce calories. Xylitol has 40% fewer calories than any other sweetener including artifical sweeteners.

How do you incorporate Xylitol into your diet? You have to go to health food store as Xylitol is available from health food stores only; you cannot get it in grocery stores yet. You can purchase it in bulk, candy, mints, gum, tooth paste, mouth rinse, dry mouth spray and oral gel.

To control decay and strengthen enamel the recommended usage is 6-7 grams of Xylitol in a day but it should be used 2-5 times a day rather than in one large dose. If you use the gum you should chew it for only 5 minutes or just long enough to get the Xylitol out. Xylitol is digested as a fiber so if you eat too much too fast it can cause gastric upset. It only takes about a week for your body to get use to metabolizing Xylitol.

Xylitol like chocolate, raisins, and grapes should not be fed to your pets. If you have any questions about Xylitol, how it works and if it would be beneficial to you; please give our office a call. We'd  be happy to talk with you more about the benefits of this amazing sweetner.